
                                                    21 Jun 2007


For the first prototype client/server system, we need a way to
establish a "session" (an instance of a running program) and for the
client and server to communicate. Some limitations of the browser and
HTTP will influence our design.

Assumptions for now:
  A program is compiled into a server part and a client part. Control
  starts on the client.

  A client asks for a program by fetching a URL from the server. At
  this point, the server begins a session, assigns a unique number to
  that session, and serves the javascript code to the client with the
  session number included.

  At this point, the server has a new blank instance of the program
  with no active threads.

  The client must begin by establishing a connection to the server,
  which we'll call the "push" connection. Since the client is the only
  one that can initiate communication, it will be its responsibility
  to always maintain the push connection and to wait for messages on
  it. The connection will need to be recycled occasionally, since each
  message that comes back on the connection is accumulated onto an
  ever-growing document. We'll let the server close the push connection
  (so that messages aren't dropped) at regular intervals, and the client
  will treat such closes as an invitation to reopen the connection.

  (For now we can close the connection after sending a single message,
   which simplifies the parsing of the result.)

  (If we want, the initial push connection can be created at the first
   moment we perform a 'go' to the server, since before that point the
   server will have no threads of control and so no reason to send
   messages.)

  (NOTE: It may make sense to give an alternative hostname to the
   server for this connection, since some browsers are limited to two
   simultaneous connections for any given server.)

  The server side needs to be able to handle clients that disappear
  as a result of the web page closing. It can do this whenever it
  sees the push connection closed by the client (a failure situation
  as this is supposed to be closed by the server) or when the push
  connection is not reopened by the client after some time limit
  (a minute or two). At this point the session is destroyed and any
  resources reclaimed.


  So it goes like this. The server interprets a url "/5/prog" as the
  beginning of a session of the program called "prog." It loads the
  requisite code from a known location: both the server-side code and
  the client javascript, so that it can be sent to the server. The
  first request returns the javascript along with a session identifier.

  To open a push connection, the client gets the url "/push/sessionid",
  using its session identifier. It then just waits for messages on that
  socket. If the socket closes, it recreates it by getting the same URL.

  For the client to send a message to the server, it posts it to the url
  "/pull/sessionid". (For now we can kill this connection after sending
  a single message.) These connections don't need to stay open (except
  maybe to minimize latency).

  